---
Title: Calculator in PyQt5 and Eric6
Date: 2017-07-31 12:00
Category: Course
Tags: 計算機程式, PyQt5
Slug: calculator-pyqt5-eric6
Author: yen
---

根據 <a href="http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qtwidgets-widgets-calculator-example.html">http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qtwidgets-widgets-calculator-example.html</a> 的說明, 利用 Eric6 與 PyQt5 開發簡單的計算器視窗程式.

<!-- PELICAN_END_SUMMARY -->

Flask 與 Javascript 建立簡單計算器: <a href='https://github.com/helloflask/calculator">https://github.com/helloflask/calculator</a>

目前在 KMOL 的計算機程式, 主要寫成三種格式, 1) 採用 PyQt5 寫單機視窗應用程式, 2) 以 Flask 及 Javascript 寫成瀏覽器程式, 3) 最後則是寫成 Android 平台上的 Apps.

PyQt5 單機應用程式與 Android Apps 的用途主要在即時與周遭的軟硬體互動, 執行虛實模擬或操作控制, 或者用來管理其他與近端軟硬體有關的主程式, 而 Flask Server Based 程式則以網際模式提供, 主要用於多人同步或非同步協同之用.

計算器原始碼
---

與 Qt5 加上 C++ 實現的簡單視窗計算器程式對應的 PyQt5 程式,  <a href="https://github.com/baoboa/pyqt5/blob/master/examples/widgets/calculator.py">https://github.com/baoboa/pyqt5/blob/master/examples/widgets/calculator.py</a>. 若使用本學期所使用的 Python 3.6 可攜程是環境 <a href="http://service.mde.tw/public/python2017fall_36.7z">http://service.mde.tw/public/python2017fall_36.7z</a>, 直接利用 SciTE 開啟 calculator.py 後按下 Tools - Go 就可以執行.

waitingForOperand 變數
---

self.waitingForOperand 成員變數, 用來記錄計算器的輸入流程中, 是否處於等待使用者輸入處理數值. 一開始 self.waitingForOperand 為 True. 當首次按下數字鍵則系統清除顯示區, 然後 self.waitingForOperand 轉為 False. 表示已經進入處理數值的輸入程序中, 這時若使用者再按其他數字按鈕, 則 if self.waitingForOperand 區段將不會執行, 也就不會刷新顯示區, 而是執行其下方的顯示區數字附加的程式段.

self.display.setText(self.display.text() + str(digitValue))

至於 self.waitingForOperand 再次轉為 True 的時機, 分別在 unaryOperatorClicked、additiveOperatorClicked、multiplicativeOperatorClicked、pointclicked 或 equalClicked 等成員函式執行後, 輸入流程又轉回等待使用者輸入運算數值的階段.

其他 self.waitingForOperand 出現在 backspaceClicked、clear 與 clearAll 函式時, 也必須確定 self.waitingForOperand 會再次轉為 True.

pendingAdditiveOperator 變數
---

若 pendingAdditiveOperator 為 True, 優先運算階段完成後顯示區換成 self.factorSoFar. 若 pendingAdditiveOperator 為 False, 則將目前顯示區中的數值對應成 self.factorSoFar.

The private calculate() function performs a binary operation. The right operand is given by rightOperand. For additive operators, the left operand is sumSoFar; for multiplicative operators, the left operand is factorSoFar. The function return false if a division by zero occurs.

sumSofFar 與 factorSoFar 變數
---

執行 calculate  函式時, 若運算子為加或減, 則左運算數為 sumSoFar, 若運算子為乘或除, 則左運算數為 factorSoFar. 右運算數則取自 rightOperand 變數.

The example consists of two classes:

Calculator is the calculator widget, with all the calculator functionality.

Button is the widget used for each of the calculator button. It derives from QToolButton.

The Calculator class provides a simple calculator widget. It inherits from QDialog and has several private slots associated with the calculator's buttons. QObject::eventFilter() is reimplemented to handle mouse events on the calculator's display.

Buttons are grouped in categories according to their behavior. For example, all the digit buttons (labeled 0 to 9) append a digit to the current operand. For these, we connect multiple buttons to the same slot (e.g., digitClicked()). The categories are digits, unary operators (Sqrt, x², 1/x), additive operators (+, -), and multiplicative operators (×, ÷). The other buttons have their own slots.

The private createButton() function is used as part of the widget construction. abortOperation() is called whenever a division by zero occurs or when a square root operation is applied to a negative number. calculate() applies a binary operator (+, -, ×, or ÷).

These variables, together with the contents of the calculator display (a QLineEdit), encode the state of the calculator:

sumInMemory contains the value stored in the calculator's memory (using MS, M+, or MC).

sumSoFar stores the value accumulated so far. When the user clicks =, sumSoFar is recomputed and shown on the display. Clear All resets sumSoFar to zero.

factorSoFar stores a temporary value when doing multiplications and divisions.

pendingAdditiveOperator stores the last additive operator clicked by the user.

pendingMultiplicativeOperator stores the last multiplicative operator clicked by the user.

waitingForOperand is true when the calculator is expecting the user to start typing an operand.

Additive and multiplicative operators are treated differently because they have different precedences. For example, 1 + 2 ÷ 3 is interpreted as 1 + (2 ÷ 3) because ÷ has higher precedence than +.

The table below shows the evolution of the calculator state as the user enters a mathematical expression.

Waiting for Operand? 等待運算處理對象?

Add. Op. - 加或減運算元,若隨後無乘與除等優先運算元, 且按下等於或接著按加或減運算元, 則前段隨即完成運算後列在 Sum so Far 欄位.

Mul. Op. - 乘或除運算元, 屬於優先運算元, 因此若輸入已經滿足運算數接優先運算元, 再接其他運算元則 將局部優先運算所需的前方運算數, 放入 Factor so Far, 而前面未處理的加或減運算數, 則放入 Sum so Far.

<!-- 這裡在測試 template 中 base.html head 標註中所加入的 style 標註用法 -->
<table>
<tr>
<th>User Input</th>	<th>Display</th>	<th>Sum so Far</th>	<th>Add. Op.</ht>	<th>Factor so Far</th>	<th>Mult. Op.</th>	<th>Waiting for Operand?</th>
</tr>

<tr>
<td></td> <td>0</td>	<td>0</td>	<td></td> <td></td> <td></td>			<td>true</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1</td>	<td>1</td>	<td>0</td>	<td></td> <td></td> <td></td>			<td>false</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>1 +</td>	<td>1</td>	<td>1</td>	<td>+</td> <td></td> <td></td>			<td>true</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>1 + 2</td>	<td>2</td>	<td>1</td>	<td>+</td>	<td></td> <td></td>		<td>false</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>1 + 2 ÷</td>	<td>2</td>	<td>1</td>	<td>+</td>	<td>2</td>	<td>÷</td> <td>true</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>1 + 2 ÷ 3</td>	<td>3</td>	<td>1</td>	<td>+</td>	<td>2</td>	<td>÷</td>	<td>false</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>1 + 2 ÷ 3 -</td>	<td>1.66667</td>	<td>1.66667</td>	<td>-</td>	<td></td> <td></td>		<td>true</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>1 + 2 ÷ 3 - 4</td>	<td>4</td>	<td>1.66667</td>	<td>-</td>		<td></td> <td></td>	<td>false</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>1 + 2 ÷ 3 - 4 =</td>	<td>-2.33333</td>	<td>0</td>		<td></td>	<td></td> <td></td>	<td>true</td>
</tr>
</table>
<br />
Unary operators, such as Sqrt, require no special handling; they can be applied immediately since the operand is already known when the operator button is clicked.

Finally, we declare the variables associated with the display and the buttons used to display numerals.

In the constructor, we initialize the calculator's state. The pendingAdditiveOperator and pendingMultiplicativeOperator variables don't need to be initialized explicitly, because the QString constructor initializes them to empty strings.

We create the QLineEdit representing the calculator's display and set up some of its properties. In particular, we set it to be read-only.

We also enlarge display's font by 8 points.

For each button, we call the private createButton() function with the proper text label and a slot to connect to the button.

The layout is handled by a single QGridLayout. The QLayout::setSizeConstraint() call ensures that the Calculator widget is always shown as its optimal size (its size hint), preventing the user from resizing the calculator. The size hint is determined by the size and size policy of the child widgets.

Most child widgets occupy only one cell in the grid layout. For these, we only need to pass a row and a column to QGridLayout::addWidget(). The display, backspaceButton, clearButton, and clearAllButton widgets occupy more than one column; for these we must also pass a row span and a column span.

Pressing one of the calculator's digit buttons will emit the button's clicked() signal, which will trigger the digitClicked() slot.

First, we find out which button sent the signal using QObject::sender(). This function returns the sender as a QObject pointer. Since we know that the sender is a Button object, we can safely cast the QObject. We could have used a C-style cast or a C++ static_cast<>(), but as a defensive programming technique we use a qobject_cast(). The advantage is that if the object has the wrong type, a null pointer is returned. Crashes due to null pointers are much easier to diagnose than crashes due to unsafe casts. Once we have the button, we extract the operator using QToolButton::text().

The slot needs to consider two situations in particular. If display contains "0" and the user clicks the 0 button, it would be silly to show "00". And if the calculator is in a state where it is waiting for a new operand, the new digit is the first digit of that new operand; in that case, any result of a previous calculation must be cleared first.

At the end, we append the new digit to the value in the display.

The unaryOperatorClicked() slot is called whenever one of the unary operator buttons is clicked. Again a pointer to the clicked button is retrieved using QObject::sender(). The operator is extracted from the button's text and stored in clickedOperator. The operand is obtained from display.

Then we perform the operation. If Sqrt is applied to a negative number or 1/x to zero, we call abortOperation(). If everything goes well, we display the result of the operation in the line edit and we set waitingForOperand to true. This ensures that if the user types a new digit, the digit will be considered as a new operand, instead of being appended to the current value.

The additiveOperatorClicked() slot is called when the user clicks the + or - button.

Before we can actually do something about the clicked operator, we must handle any pending operations. We start with the multiplicative operators, since these have higher precedence than additive operators:

If × or ÷ has been clicked earlier, without clicking = afterward, the current value in the display is the right operand of the × or ÷ operator and we can finally perform the operation and update the display.

If + or - has been clicked earlier, sumSoFar is the left operand and the current value in the display is the right operand of the operator. If there is no pending additive operator, sumSoFar is simply set to be the text in the display.

Finally, we can take care of the operator that was just clicked. Since we don't have the right-hand operand yet, we store the clicked operator in the pendingAdditiveOperator variable. We will apply the operation later, when we have a right operand, with sumSoFar as the left operand.

The multiplicativeOperatorClicked() slot is similar to additiveOperatorClicked(). We don't need to worry about pending additive operators here, because multiplicative operators have precedence over additive operators.

Like in additiveOperatorClicked(), we start by handling any pending multiplicative and additive operators. Then we display sumSoFar and reset the variable to zero. Resetting the variable to zero is necessary to avoid counting the value twice.

The pointClicked() slot adds a decimal point to the content in display.

The changeSignClicked() slot changes the sign of the value in display. If the current value is positive, we prepend a minus sign; if the current value is negative, we remove the first character from the value (the minus sign).

The backspaceClicked() removes the rightmost character in the display. If we get an empty string, we show "0" and set waitingForOperand to true.

The clear() slot resets the current operand to zero. It is equivalent to clicking Backspace enough times to erase the entire operand.

The clearAll() slot resets the calculator to its initial state.

The clearMemory() slot erases the sum kept in memory, readMemory() displays the sum as an operand, setMemory() replace the sum in memory with the current sum, and addToMemory() adds the current value to the value in memory. For setMemory() and addToMemory(), we start by calling equalClicked() to update sumSoFar and the value in the display.

The private createButton() function is called from the constructor to create calculator buttons.

The private abortOperation() function is called whenever a calculation fails. It resets the calculator state and displays "####".

The private calculate() function performs a binary operation. The right operand is given by rightOperand. For additive operators, the left operand is sumSoFar; for multiplicative operators, the left operand is factorSoFar. The function return false if a division by zero occurs.
